---
layout: default
title: 15N and 2H proteomic stable isotope probing links nitrogen flow to archaeal heterotrophic activity.
date: 2014-04-18T20:50:26+00:00
author: omicsbio
parent: 2014 posts
grand_parent: Posts
---
# 15N and 2H proteomic stable isotope probing links nitrogen flow to archaeal heterotrophic activity.
Justice, N. B., <span style="color: #0000ff;">Zhou Li</span>, <span style="color: #0000ff;">Yingfeng Wang</span>, Spaudling, S. E., Mosier, A. C., Hettich, R. L., <span style="color: #0000ff;">Chongle Pan</span> & Banfield, J. F.

<span style="color: #ff0000;"><em>Environmental microbiology</em></span>, doi:10.1111/1462-2920.12488 (2014). [[Link to Article](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1462-2920.12488/full)]

<!--more-->

**Abstract:** Understanding how individual species contribute to nutrient transformations in a microbial community is critical to prediction of overall ecosystem function. We conducted microcosm experiments in which floating acid mine drainage (AMD) microbial biofilms were submerged &#8211; recapitulating the final stage in a natural biofilm life cycle. Biofilms were amended with either 15 NH4 + or deuterium oxide (2 H2 O) and proteomic stable isotope probing (SIP) was used to track the extent to which different members of the community used these molecules in protein synthesis across anaerobic iron-reducing, aerobic iron-reducing and aerobic iron-oxidizing environments. Sulfobacillus spp. synthesized 15 N-enriched protein almost exclusively under iron-reducing conditions whereas the Leptospirillum spp. synthesized 15 N-enriched protein in all conditions. There were relatively few 15 N-enriched archaeal proteins, and all showed low atom% enrichment, consistent with Archaea synthesizing protein using the predominantly 14 N biomass derived from recycled biomolecules. In parallel experiments using 2 H2 O, extensive archaeal protein synthesis was detected in all conditions. In contrast, the bacterial species showed little protein synthesis using 2 H2 O. The nearly exclusive ability of Archaea to synthesize proteins using 2 H2 O may be due to archaeal heterotrophy, whereby Archaea offset deleterious effects of 2 H by accessing 1 H generated by respiration of organic compounds.