---
id: 962
title: Analysis of Permafrost Carbon Cycling in Boreal Forest using Improved Metatranscriptomics and Proteomic Stable Isotope Probing
date: 2014-10-30T11:22:37+00:00
author: omicsbio
layout: post
guid: https://www.omicsbio.org/?p=962
permalink: /2014/10/30/analysis-of-permafrost-carbon-cycling-in-boreal-forest-using-improved-metatranscriptomics-and-proteomic-stable-isotope-probing/
categories:
  - Proposals
---
This is an proposal that I submitted to the DOE BER early career program in 2013. It was not funded.

**Project Overview:**

Boreal forest deposits a large amount of new carbon to the underlying Permafrost Active Layer Soil (PALS). Global warming will thicken active layer from thawed permafrost and expose the stored old carbon to microbial mineralization. To mechanistically model global carbon cycling under climate changes, it is crucial to characterize the PALS microbial communities at the molecular level using an omics systems biology approach. The Bonanza Creek Long Term Ecological Research (BNZ LTER) site in interior Alaska provides a model ecosystem for boreal forest with thawing discontinuous permafrost.

Omics analyses of soil microbial communities in PALS and other terrestrial ecosystems will require development of new technologies to overcome their enormous complexity (thousands of species at 1% to 0.01% abundance each). Metagenomics, typically the starting point for multi -omics analyses, has only generated a large number of highly fragmented genomic sequences from soil communities. The dynamic range of metaproteomics is too limited to provide a comprehensive view of metabolic activities of soil communities. Here we aim to achieve a breakthrough on soil -omics via metatranscriptomics and targeted proteomic stale isotope probing. <u>In Specific Aim 1, we will deliver the capability to assemble up to 10<sup>5</sup> transcripts from soil metatranscriptomics by developing a hybrid transcript assembly algorithm based on reference protein alignment and overlap graph assembly.</u> Metatranscriptomics will be integrated with metagenomics to connect and bin transcripts and genomic fragments into organism bins based on their genomic depth coverage in a sample series. Stable Isotope Probing (SIP) enables measurement of nutrient flows in microbial communities using <sup>15</sup>N-, <sup>13</sup>C-, or <sup>2</sup>H-labeled substrates. <u>In Specific Aim 2, we will scale up our proteomic SIP approach to soil communities using a targeted proteomic analysis that measures stable isotope enrichment level of selected proteins.</u> Dynamic range of protein detection will be improved by using 3-dimensional separation and directed mass spectrometry analysis.

Existing climate models essentially consider the microbial processing of soil carbon in PALS as black boxes. Unraveling these black boxes will be critical for accurate modeling of carbon decomposition under future boreal forest climate with longer summer, earlier spring, and increased seasonal temperatures. Enabled by the new omics technologies described above, <u>we will compare the carbon cycling processes by PALS communities in spring and summer from surface oxic soil and deeper anoxic soil using integrated metatranscriptomics, metagenomics, and metaproteomics in Specific Aim 3.</u> Replicate samples will be collected in two consecutive years from 5 sampling sites in BNZ LTER. The activities of the PALS communities will be represented as a network of metabolic processes in major organisms or functional guilds. The increased microbial activities from spring to summer will be correlated with warming, moisture increase, and other seasonal changes of PALS. The results will inform the adaption of these communities to external condition changes and their potential responses to longer-term climate changes. <u>In Specific Aim 4, SIP experiments in laboratory microcosms will be used to trace the consumption of <sup>2</sup>H<sub>2</sub>O (a general substrate), <sup>13</sup>C-acetate (a common fermentation product and acetoclastic methanogenesis substrate), and <sup>13</sup>CH<sub>4</sub> (a key carbon cycling intermediate and product).</u> We will infer organism-specific biomass production rate, identify acetate-utilizing organisms and methanotrophic organisms, and estimate the consumption rates of acetate and methane in the four types of PALS communities. The -omics and SIP results will provide information to address a set of specific scientific questions described below. We will use the existing BER capabilities in metagenomics and metatranscriptomics at Joint Genome Institute (JGI), metaproteomics at ORNL, and informatics at DOE Systems Biology Knowledgebase (KBase). Our research will leverage the research infrastructure and expertise of the Next-Generation Ecosystem Experiments Arctic (NGEE Arctic) project led by Drs. Stan Wullschleger and David Graham at ORNL.

The outcome of this study will provide not only new fundamental knowledge on PALS, but also a set of biological processes and parameters to be incorporated into modeling of carbon cycling in DOE’s Community Land Model through collaboration with Dr. Melanie Mayes in ORNL’s Terrestrial Ecosystems Sciences (TES) Scientific Focus Area (SFA) project. We will work with our collaborators in JGI, ORNL, NGEE, and KBase to add our new algorithms and methods to their toolboxes and make them broadly available for other studies of soil communities across terrestrial ecosystems.