---
layout: default
title: Integrated Omics Analyses of a Populus Pedigree for Crop Improvement
date: 2015-11-03T16:18:10+00:00
author: omicsbio
parent: 2015 posts
grand_parent: Posts
---
# Integrated Omics Analyses of a Populus Pedigree for Crop Improvement
We were awarded a user project from the DOE Joint Genome Institute-Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Collaborative Science Initiative. We will collaborate with a plant biologist, Dr. Jay Chen, in the project.

**Allocation**: 120 Gb PacBio sequencing, 500 Gb Illumina sequencing, and 1000 mass spectrometry hours.

**Focused Topic Areas:** Biofuels and bioproducts

**Relevant Categories:** Plant flagship genome

**Specific Aims:**

_Populus_ is a DOE flagship plant for biofuel biomass production. Improving _Populus_ as a feedstock crop is a major focus of DOE Bioenergy Research Centers (BRCs) and many academic laboratories. Here, we aim to determine structural and local variations in the genomes of _Populus_ _trichocarpa_ and _Populus_ _deltoides_ using PacBio/Illumina sequencing and understand the molecular ramifications of these polymorphisms in the function of fine roots, stem xylem tissues and leaves using transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics. The proposed research will focus on 7 selected _Populus_ genotypes.

In Aim 1, we will reconstruct haploid-resolved genomes for five genotypes in the pedigree, including the two _P._ _trichocarpa_ genotypes, the two _P. deltoides_ genotypes, and the F1 hybrid genotype, using PacBio/Illumina hybrid sequencing. The hybrid sequencing will include 40X genomic coverage by PacBio and 40X coverage by Illumina (_i.e._, 20X coverage for each haploid by both PacBio and Illumina). We have developed a computational workflow, termed Pheona (<u>P</u>acBio <u>h</u>ybrid <u>e</u>rror c<u>o</u>rrection a<u>n</u>d <u>a</u>ssembly), for metagenome assembly in collaboration with the JGI metagenomics program. Here we will adapt the Pheona workflow for assembly of eukaryotic diploid genomes. For each heterozygous genotype, we will generate two sequence-resolved haploid genomes. This approach will be validated using the existing reference genome of _P. trichocarpa_ ‘Nisqually-1’. We will use this workflow to generate haploid-resolved genomes for the other 4 genotypes. The results will allow us to perform a series of comparative genomics analysis, including comparison of the two haploid genomes in each genotype, comparison between the two genotypes of each _Populus_ species and comparison between the two _Populus_ species. These comparisons will allow us to identify conserved genetic features that may control relevant biofuels and biomass traits. Because the genomes are obtained through assembly of long reads, we are especially interested in structural variations and large-scale genome rearrangements in these comparisons, which cannot be obtained through short-read sequencing and reference mapping. Together, these results will provide a more detailed evolutionary history of the _Populus_ genus that can be used to design breeding experiments.

In Aim 2, we will measure the transcriptomes, proteomes and metabolomes in the fine roots, stem xylem tissues and leaves of the 7 genotypes. A total of 63 samples (7 genotypes x 3 tissue types x 3 biological replicates) will be collected from trees grown in the ORNL greenhouse. The greenhouse environment will provide a uniform growth setting for all trees and allow immediate sample preservation and preparation which is critical for unbiased extraction of metabolites and total RNAs, which is difficult to accomplish in field conditions. Illumina reads from transcriptomics and tandem mass spectra from proteomics for each genotype will be searched against its own haploid-resolved genomes. We will search for alternative splicing using transcriptomics data and post-translational modifications using proteomics data. The perfectly matched individual genome/transcriptome/proteome/metabolome results across three major plant tissue types will greatly improve the functional annotation of the _P. deltoides_ and _P._ _trichocarpa_ genomes, including gene model construction, metabolic pathway reconstruction and regulatory network inference. Because of the resolved haploid genomes in these genotypes, we will be able to further resolve the expression levels of the two alleles of many genes in the three tissues. The mRNA/protein expression of some alleles will be further mapped across multiple genotypes through the pedigree, shedding light on the molecular effects of genomic variations carried by some alleles.

In Aim 3, we will use the results obtained in this study to re-analyze the data from previous large-scale projects. The two pseudo-backcross genotypes (Fig. 1) are among a progeny population of 712 genotypes created from the crossing between _P. deltoides_ D-124 and F1 hybrid 52-225. JGI and ORNL have sequenced ~300 pseudo-backcross genotypes from this population in an eQTL study to identify important genetic elements involved in cell wall chemistry and sugar release (http://jgi.doe.gov/gene-expression-analyses-populus-crosses/). RNAseq reads from this eQTL study were mapped only onto the _P._ _trichocarpa_ reference genome of Nisqually-1 genotype, which can miss many variations in _P. deltoides_ and the F1 hybrid. We will re-analyze all ~300 pseudo-backcross genotypes’ RNAseq data from the eQTL study by using the haploid-resolved genomes of the parental genotypes. This will identify the exact genomic variations involved certain trait association. We will further examine the effects of these variations based on the proteomics and metabolomics profiles of the parental genotypes. We also performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 1051 _Populus_ genotypes (Evans et al. 2014). These genotypes were re-sequenced by Illumina and have extensive phenotypic trait measurements. We will create a composite reference genome from the new haploid genomes obtained in this study and re-map Illumina reads of the GWAS genotypes onto the composite genome of _P._ _trichocarpa_. This may recover many new variations, particularly large-scale insertions and deletions that may have been missed previously. The improved genome annotation and metabolic and regulatory networks of _P. deltoides_ and _P._ _trichocarpa_ to be obtained here will be used to interpret the eQTL and GWAS results.

&nbsp;