---
layout: default
title: 'Online Consent'
nav_exclude: true
---

## Online Consent to Participate in Research

Would you like to be involved in research at the University of Oklahoma?
I am Dr. Chongle Pan from the School of Computer Science and the Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology, and along with researcher Yunlong Liu, we invite you to participate in my research project entitled “Evaluation of a Chatbot for smoking cessation”. This research is being conducted at the University of Oklahoma. You must be at least 18 years of age to participate in this study. Please read this document and contact me to ask any questions that you may have BEFORE agreeing to take part in my research.

### What is the purpose of this research?
In this survey, you will be asked to interact with our chatbot and provide feedback on your experience. Your evaluation results will help us improve the chatbot's ability to assist individuals in achieving their goals.

### Are you eligible to participate in this survey?
To participate in this survey, you must be a smoker and able to communicate in English, including reading and writing.

### What will I be asked to do?
If you agree to be in this research, you will need to interact with the chatbot and provide feedback on your experience. As part of your participation, you will be asked to provide feedback on the helpfulness and/or accuracy of the messages generated by the application. Your input is valuable in improving the system and ensuring its effectiveness.

### How long will this take?
Your participation in this survey will take 30-35 minutes, including both the chatbot conversation and the user feedback. Your participation is voluntary, meaning you may exit the survey at any time. 

### What are the risks and/or benefits if I participate?
There is a risk of loss of confidentiality if your information or your identity is obtained by someone other than the investigators, but precautions will be taken to prevent this from happening. The confidentiality of your electronic data created by you or by the researchers will be maintained as required by applicable law and to the degree permitted by the technology used. Absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed.
It's possible that the messages generated by the application could cause distress or offer unhelpful suggestions, as the AI system may not always accurately interpret or understand individual contexts or emotional states. You will be requested to provide feedback on the helpfulness and/or accuracy of the messages generated by the application.

You can try the new communication technology and experience interacting with our newly designed chatbot. Additionally, as a token of appreciation, participants will receive compensation for their valuable time and input.

### Will I be compensated for participating?
You will be reimbursed for your time and participation in this research. The compensation will be $5 after you finish the whole study, including a pre-survey, a conversation with the tested chatbot, and the feedback survey.

### Who will see my information?
In research reports, there will be no information that will make it possible to identify you. Data are collected via an online platform not hosted by OU that has its own privacy and security policies for keeping your information confidential. Please note no assurance can be made as to the use of the data you provide for purposes other than this research.

### What will happen to my data in the future?
After removing all identifiers, we might share your data with other researchers or use it in future research without obtaining additional consent from you.

### Do I have to participate?
No. If you do not participate, you will not be penalized or lose benefits or services unrelated to the research. If you decide to participate, you can stop participating at any time and don’t have to answer any questions.

### Who do I contact with questions, concerns, or complaints?
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints about the research or have experienced a research-related injury, please contact:
Chongle Pan at 405-325-2972 or cpan@ou.edu.
Yunlong Liu at 913-227-5069 or yl.l@ou.edu.

You can also contact the University of Oklahoma – Norman Campus Institutional Review Board (OU-NC IRB) at 405-325-8110 or irb@ou.edu if you have questions about your rights as a research participant, concerns, or complaints about the research and wish to talk to someone other than the researcher(s) or if you cannot reach the researcher(s).

This research has been approved by the University of Oklahoma, Norman Campus IRB. IRB Number: #15693 Approval date: Aug 7, 2023
 
